# Migrating to v15 <!-- {docsify-ignore-all} -->

Several Node.js APIs now have standardized counterparts that are available to other JavaScript runtimes, especially web browsers. In this release, we built on the work done in the `v14` release, and focused on moving away from non-portable modules and APIs. Those were either replaced them with standardized ones, or alternatively pluggable, platform-specific bindings were introduced where necessary.

As a result of this effort, Z-Wave JS is now able to run in Chromium-based browsers (with a bit of bundler magic), and possibly on other runtimes like Deno or Bun in the future.

Avid readers might have spotted the new [usage examples in our documentation](https://zwave-js.github.io/zwave-js/#/examples/index), which also include an [interactive playground](https://playground.zwave-js.io/) to try out Z-Wave JS in the browser.

Achieving this required some breaking changes, many of which should only affect developers using low-level APIs.

## Minimum Node.js version is now 20.x

We dropped Node.js 18 a bit earlier than its end-of-life date to take advantage of the compatibility of Node.js 20 with web APIs.

## Moved platform specific functionality into platform bindings

- `createDefaultTransportFormat` is now exported from `@zwave-js/core/bindings/log/node` instead of `@zwave-js/core`
- The `storage.driver` driver option was removed. Similar functionality is now available through the new `host.fs` driver option.
- Replacing the `serialport` bindings is no longer done through the `testingHooks.serialPortBinding` option, but through the new `host.serial` driver option.

## Changed how the bootloader status is exposed

As of this release, Z-Wave JS supports communicating with the text-based CLI exposed by some SoC end device firmwares. The relevant functionality is available through the new `driver.cli` property. Since the Z-Wave module we're communicating with can now be something else than the bootloader or a controller firmware, a breaking change is required:

- The `driver.isInBootloader()` method has been removed. Use the new `driver.mode` property instead, which allows distinguishing between controller firmware, end device CLI firmware and the bootloader.
- The `allowBootloaderOnly` driver option has been removed. To achieve the same behavior as before, set the new `bootloaderMode` option to `allow`.

## Deprecated `isDocker` method has been removed

Use the [`is-docker` package](https://github.com/sindresorhus/is-docker) instead or copy its code into your project.

## Removed deprecated sync versions of methods

Several methods related to

- CC and message parsing and serialization
- encryption/decryption
- firmware handling

were deprecated in a previous release and are now removed:

- The deprecated `CommandClass.parse(...): CommandClass` and the `async CommandClass.parseAsync(...): Promise<CommandClass>` methods have been merged into a single signature `async CommandClass.parse(...): Promise<CommandClass>`. Synchronous parsing of CommandClasses using the `parse` method is no longer possible.
- The deprecated `CommandClass.from(...): CommandClass` and the `async CommandClass.fromAsync(...): Promise<CommandClass>` methods have been merged into a single signature `CommandClass.from(...): CommandClass | Promise<CommandClass>`. For CCs that support synchronous parsing, this will return a CC instance, otherwise a Promsie that resolves to one.
- The deprecated `CommandClass.serialize(...): Bytes` and the `async CommandClass.serializeAsync(...): Promise<Bytes>` methods have been merged into a single signature `async CommandClass.serialize(...): Promise<Bytes>`. Synchronous serialization of CommandClasses is no longer possible.
- The deprecated `CommandClass.mergePartialCCs(...)` and the `async CommandClass.mergePartialCCsAsync(...)` methods have been merged into a single signature `async CommandClass.mergePartialCCs(...)`. Synchronous merging of partial CCs is no longer possible, but this should not affect applications.
- The deprecated `Message.serialize(...): Bytes` and the `async Message.serializeAsync(...): Promise<Bytes>` methods have been merged into a single signature `async Message.serialize(...): Promise<Bytes>`. Synchronous serialization of Serial API messages is no longer possible.
- `SecurityManager.generateAuthKeySync` and `SecurityManager.generateAuthKeyAsync` have been replaced with the method `SecurityManager.generateAuthKey`, which is now purely `async`
- `SecurityManager.generateEncryptionKeySync` and `SecurityManager.generateEncryptionKeyAsync` have been replaced with the method `SecurityManager.generateEncryptionKey`, which is now purely `async`
- The property `SecurityManager.authKey` was replaced with an async method `async getAuthKey(): Promise<Uint8Array>`
- The property `SecurityManager.encryptionKey` was replaced with an async method `async getEncryptionKey(): Promise<Uint8Array>`
- The following methods of the `SecurityManager2` class are now `async`, the corresponding `...Async` variants have been removed. Typically applications shouldn't need to use them:
  - `setKey`
  - `generateNonce`
  - `initializeSPAN`
  - `initializeTempSPAN`
  - `nextNonce`
  - `getMulticastKeyAndIV`
  - `nextPeerMPAN`
- The `extractFirmware` method is now `async`, its `...Async` counterpart was removed
- The `parseQRCodeString` method is now `async`, its `...Async` counterpart was removed
- The `Controller.dsk` property was removed in favor of the method `async getDSK(): Promise<Uint8Array>`
